---
layout: post
title:  "Introduction to Server Hardening and creating Golden AMIs"
date:   2020-03-03
excerpt: "Server Hardening"
tag:
- Server Hardening 
- Auiditing
- Compliance Checks
- CI/CD Pipeline
- Automation 
- DevSecOps
- AWS
- GoldenAMI
comments: true
---
Information Security is an entire universe in itself and there is always new to learn every day. As I have made a promise with myself to document my learning, this article is a continuous effort towards that. In today's article, I will go through the basics of server hardening and will try to establish a basic understanding of the core components of this concept.In the later part of this article,we will discuss about how you can automate the process of Server Hardening and create a pipeline which automatically scan,audit new operating system images,patch them , install necessarry logging systems and bake Golden AMIs. 


Let's start with the term "Hardening", what exactly we mean by it, in generic terms, Hardening is something where we take the soft material/components and then made few changes in it in such a way that the end product of material/component is more stronger and more resistant to the damages. That's exactly what server hardening is!  In simple technical terms, we take a base/vanilla operating system/software/configuration component then make changes to its configurations in such a way that the end product is more resistant to the attacks and has better detection/mitigation capabilities in it.

Now equip the definition of hardening, let's establish what exactly we are going to harden when we say server hardening. Server hardening in itself is a vague term, right? 
### A typical server hardening consists of below core components:

    1. Patch Management.
    2. Turning off unnecessary services.
    3. Disabling unnecessary user accounts and setting password policies.
    4. Configuring and installing the detection components.
    5. Setting up pipelines to send logs generated by the system, IDS, AVs to a centralized location.
    6. Defining the roles and responsibilities for security maintenance of servers.
    
 Now as we have established the *"What"* part of the article,lets move to the second part which is *"Why"* it is necessary and why companies,governments pay close attention to Server Hardening?

As the "Why" part is pretty self-evident,to keep your interest in the article, let cut it to the short. The main idea of server hardening is to reduce the attack surface and fix the blind spots. Another reason why server hardening is important is that default is usually bad when we talk in terms of security, be it passwords, policies or accounts. Although with time, companies are improving it but let's face it, a company will keep things in default as it defines their product's features and reduces the usefulness. In short, a company's primary focus is its product usability and features. Additionally, your requirement could be different from the other company due to the difference in the nature of business. For example,an e-commerce company may focus on protecting its Internet-facing web apps, while a hospital may focus on protecting confidential patient information.

> But there is one thing common in every requirement i.e. the end goal. The end goal of any company to keep its applications and machines secure. All end goals boil down to the CIA in security.

Now, you might be wondering as my company requirements will be different from your company so I have to manually search, learn, test and develop basic hardening as per my needs. The answer to this is YES to some extent, but the good news is that there are a lot of NON-Profit organizations whose mission is to prepare, validate and promote best practice solutions for cyber defense.

Few of these NON-Profit organizations,we will discuss here in brief:

### Center for Internet Security (CIS)
It is a Non-Profit organization that leverages the vast global community of IT professionals to develop, promote security best practices to safeguard the public and private establishments. They research the various operating system settings and then prepare a security baseline/standard for that piece of software which is known as CIS Benchmarks. There are two levels of CIS benchmarks i.e. Level 1 and Level 2. Level 1 is the set of essential security guidelines and Level 2 is for information systems that require a great level of security and are classified as sensitive.

### DoD Cyber Exchange
The DoD Cyber Exchange is a US government initiative to offer tools, resources for government establishments as well as for the general public. The DoD Cyber Exchange is mainly known for Security Technical Implementation Guides commonly known as STIGS. The STIGs are similar to CIS benchmarks, where they recommend the security best practices in the XML format which can be consumed by many Open Source tools such as OpenSCAP and INSPEC
